OSDOCS-7495: add backup and restore (#63608)
openshift/openshift-docs: microshift_troubleshooting/microshift-troubleshoot-backup-restore.adoc

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="microshift-troubleshoot-backup-restore.adoc"]
= Troubleshoot data backup and restore
include::_attributes/attributes-microshift.adoc[]
:context: microshift-troubleshoot-data-backup-and-restore

toc::[]

To troubleshoot failed data backups and restorations, check the basics first, such as data paths, storage configuration, and storage capacity.

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-backup-data-failed"]
== Backup data failed

> Data backups are automatic on OSTree systems. If you are not using an OSTree system and attempted to create a manual backup, the following reasons could cause the backup to fail:

Reviewer: I noticed `RPM-OSTree` and `OSTree` are used interchangeably - should we settle on one?

Author: Yeah, I'm thinking `rpm-ostree` because it is like that in the RHEL for Edge docs.

* If {product-title} stopped running because of an error, you cannot perform a backup of the data.

> ** First, make sure the system is healthy.

Reviewer 2: Is the system in this instance microshift ? Should the user verify the health using "systemctl status microshift"

Author: @dhensel-rh The system here means the whole enchilada. Anything we have Greenboot scripts for. I feel like verifying system health in this case might have a variety of logs to check. @dhellmann WDYT?

** Then, stop it in a healthy state before attempting a backup.
** You might need to wait several minutes after a system start to successfully stop {product-title}. Allow the system to complete health checks and any other background processes before attempting to back up.

* If you do not have sufficient storage for the data, the backup fails. Ensure that you have enough storage for the {product-title} data.

* If you do not have sufficient permissions, a backup can fail. Ensure you have the correct user permissions to create a backup and perform the required configurations.

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-backup-logs"]
== Backup logs
* With manual backups, the logs print to the console.

> * For RPM-OSTree automated backups, logs are automatically generated. You can check OSTRee logs by running the following command:

Reviewer: Can we say something like "backup logs are part of MicroShift service logs (journal)"?
"You can check OSTRee logs" - I'd change OSTRee for MicroShift

+
[source, terminal]
----

> $ sudo jounralctl -u microshift

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ sudo journalctl -u microshift
```

----

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-restore-data-failed"]
== Restore data failed

> The restoration of data can fail for a variety of reasons, including mismatched data versions and storage and permission issues. A few examples are provided here.

Reviewer: Just FYI: Mismatched data versions are only caught when MicroShift runs, `microshift restore` does not verify that (though that's not a bad idea for an improvement).

Procedures of backup and restore are just an actions of copying files from/to `/var/lib/microshift-backups/X/` and `/var/lib/microshift/`.

(not that we need to include that in the docs, just thought I'd provide more context)

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-RPM-OSTree-data-restore-failed"]
=== RPM-OSTree systems data restore failed
Data restorations are automatic on OSTree systems, but can fail, for example:

> * You are attempting to restore data from a deployment that no longer exists on your system.

Reviewer: I don't think it's possible. Backup candidates for restore are:
- current deployment's backup (e.g. done during previous boots)
- rollback deployment's backup (but ostree must report that there is in fact such deployment)
MicroShift won't pick just any random available backup to restore from.

> You are attempting

Maybe that's tech doc style, but in this case user doesn't do anything - it is the MicroShift deciding to restore the backup.

User could influence this by, for example, running `rpm-ostree rollback` command to go to previous deployment. But if user didn't play with the backups, the backup for the rollback should exists (we don't support upgrade from unhealthy system (unhealthy == no backup)).

** Only the latest backups that have corresponding deployments are retained. Outdated backups that do not have a matching deployment are automatically removed.

> * You are attempting to restore data from a newer version of {product-title}.

Reviewer: "You are" - maybe this section is not for "automated backup & restore" on "ostree-based systems" but for manual b&r on "regular RPM-based systems"?

```
=== RPM-OSTree systems data restore failed
```

If it's manual on non-ostree, then on non-ostree there's no notion of "Deployments"

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="microshift-troubleshoot-backup-restore.adoc"]
= Troubleshoot data backup and restore
include::_attributes/attributes-microshift.adoc[]
:context: microshift-troubleshoot-data-backup-and-restore

toc::[]

To troubleshoot failed data backups and restorations, check the basics first, such as data paths, storage configuration, and storage capacity.

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-backup-data-failed"]
== Backup data failed

> Data backups are automatic on `rpm-ostree` systems. If you are not using an `rpm-ostree` system and attempted to create a manual backup, the following reasons could cause the backup to fail:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Data backups are automatic on `rpm-ostree` systems. If you are not using an `rpm-ostree` system and attempted to create a manual backup, the following reasons can cause the backup to fail:
```
From the IBM Style Word Usage page: Do not use _could_ in the present tense to mean _might_ or _can_. Use only in the past conditional form, for example, “files that could not be identified”.

* If {product-title} stopped running because of an error, you cannot perform a backup of the data.

> ** First, make sure the system is healthy.

Reviewer 3: If these steps should be done in a specific order, they should be in a numbered list. For example:

```
* If {product-title} stopped running because of an error, you cannot perform a backup of the data.
.. Make sure the system is healthy.
.. Stop the system before you attempt a backup.
.. etc.
```

** Then, stop it in a healthy state before attempting a backup.

> ** You might need to wait several minutes after a system start to successfully stop {product-title}. Allow the system to complete health checks and any other background processes before attempting to back up.

Reviewer 3: Line 17 says to stop the system, but line 18 implies that you started the system. I'm not sure what to suggest because I'm not sure what the actual procedure entails, but I think this needs some clarification.

* If you do not have sufficient storage for the data, the backup fails. Ensure that you have enough storage for the {product-title} data.

* If you do not have sufficient permissions, a backup can fail. Ensure you have the correct user permissions to create a backup and perform the required configurations.

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-backup-logs"]
== Backup logs
* Logs print to the console during manual backups.
* Logs are automatically generated for `rpm-ostree` system automated backups as part of the {product-title} journal logs. You can check the logs by running the following command:
+
[source, terminal]
----
$ sudo journalctl -u microshift
----

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-restore-data-failed"]
== Restore data failed

> The restoration of data can fail for a variety of reasons, including storage and permission issues. Mismatched data versions can cause failures when {product-title} restarts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The restoration of data can fail for many reasons, including storage and permission issues. Mismatched data versions can cause failures when {product-title} restarts.
```
Suggesting a simpler word here.

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-RPM-OSTree-data-restore-failed"]
=== RPM-OSTree-based systems data restore failed
Data restorations are automatic on `rpm-ostree` systems, but can fail, for example:

* The only backups that are restored on `rpm-ostree` systems are backups from the current deployment or a rollback deployment. Backups are not taken on an unhealthy system.

** Only the latest backups that have corresponding deployments are retained. Outdated backups that do not have a matching deployment are automatically removed.

** Data is usually not restored from a newer version of {product-title}.

** Ensure that the data you are restoring follows same versioning pattern as the update path. For example, if the destination version of {product-title} is an older version than the version of the {product-title} data you are currently using, the restoration can fail.

[id="troubleshoot-backup-restore-microshift-rpm-manual-restore-data-failed"]
=== RPM-based manual data restore failed

> If you are using a RPM system that is not `rpm-ostree` and attempted to restore a manual backup, the following reasons could cause the restoration to fail:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are using a RPM system that is not `rpm-ostree` and tried to restore a manual backup, the following reasons can cause the restoration to fail:
```

* If {product-title} stopped running because of an error, you cannot restore data.

> ** First, make sure the system is healthy.

Reviewer 3: If the steps on lines 55 and 56 should be taken in a specific order, place them in a numbered list. If you use a numbered list, you can revise the steps to simply "Make sure the system is healthy." and "Start the system in a healthy state before you attempt to restore the data."
